 
 
NURP Supports NASA Extreme 
Environment Mission Operations (NEEMO) 
 
What is NEEMO?  
 
The NASA Extreme Environment Mission 
Operations (NEEMO) program is a NOAA-
NASA partnership designed to prepare 
astronauts for long-duration space habitation.  
NASA astronauts live and work onboard the 
National Undersea Research Program’s 
(NURP) Aquarius (see box below), an 
undersea lab that rests on the Florida Keys 
National Marine Sanctuary (FKNMS) seafloor 
62 feet below the ocean’s surface.   
 
Similar in size to the International Space 
Station (ISS) living module, Aquarius provides 
the physical isolation, operational complexity, Zvezda, the International Space Station module 
communication networks and science where astronauts live and work. .  
objectives typical of an outer space mission.  
 
Additionally, habitation onboard Aquarius 
requires an absolute reliance on one’s 
immediate life support systems, posing the 
potential dangers associated with space 
habitation.  The facility is supported by a 10-
meter buoy on the surface that provides power, 
life support, and communications to the 
aquanauts.  
 
The mission control base on Key Largo supports 
missions with 24-hour video, audio and life-
support systems monitoring. NEEMO missions 
host live-links with the ISS and the Johnson 
Space Center’s Exploration Planning and 
Operations Center (ExPOC) control room, Aquarius, the world’s only operational underwater 
simulating the interaction between astronaut and habitat, situated on the FKNMS seafloor.  
control room on space flights. 
 
 
A quarius is currently the only operational, offshore underwater habitat in the world, typically used by 
m arine scientists to study coral reefs and coastal ocean processes. Aquarius is owned by NOAA, 
o perated by the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, and funded by NOAA's Undersea Research 
P rogram (NURP).  Its unique design allows scientists to live and work on the seafloor for extended 
p eriods using a special technique called saturation diving, which dramatically increases the time divers 
can spe nd working in the ocean’s depths.  A buoy on the surface provides the Aquarius with power, life 
support  and communications capabilities. 
 
NEEMO missions on board Aquarius  
  
Through NEEMO, NURP has enabled NASA to 
further develop space flight training procedures; 
expand crew and mission control communication 
techniques; and evaluate methods that address 
the physiological issues and potential medical 
problems associated with lengthy space missions.  
 
Living in Aquarius for up to two weeks, astronauts 
work alongside experts from NURP’s National 
Undersea Research Center at UNC Wilmington to 
conduct a variety of training and evaluation 
missions.   
 Astronauts simulating gall bladder removal 
To train for medical emergencies in space, onboard Aquarius. 
astronauts have practiced telementoring, a 
method where physicians on Earth guide non-
physicians in space to perform the necessary 
medical procedures.  In the training exercise, a 
surgeon in Canada guided Aquarius aquanauts to 
perform the emergency removal of a gallbladder.  
All diagnostic and surgical tasks were performed 
on a pair of highly complex surgical dummies.   
 
Astronauts are able to practice for space walks 
with US Navy EX-14 hard-hat dive suits, which 
offer limited mobility and a slightly negative 
buoyancy.  Water drag notwithstanding, walking Testing the ability to manipulate equipment    
underwater in these suits provides an experience while wearing EX-14 system diving suits. 
very similar to walking on the moon. Wearing the 
suits while constructing structures underwater 
can serve as an analog for extra-vehicular 
assembly in space.   
Remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) equipped 
with video cameras and manipulator arms may 
one day be employed to find locations suitable 
for human habitation on other planets.  During 
NEEMO missions, astronauts have practiced 
operating ROVs underwater, which simulates 
manipulating the flight of ROVs in space.   Maneuvering an ROV tethered from a boat 
serves as an analog for ROV manipulation in 
For further information contact:      space  
Andrew Shepard,     
NURC-UNCW Director 
sheparda@uncw.edu 
  
 
            
        NOAA's Undersea Research Program 
1315 East-West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910                 
Phone: (301) 713-2427   Fax: (301) 713-1967 
http://www.nurp.noaa.gov 
 
