National Aeronautics and Space Administration
FIT EXPLORER MISSION HANDOUT
YOUR MISSION:  Mission: Control!
You will perform throwing and catching techniques on one foot to 
improve balance and spatial awareness. You will also record
observations about improvements in balance and spatial awareness 
during this physical experience in your Mission Journal.
All people need to have well-developed balance and spatial awareness. 
If not, we would all fall over constantly and have trouble walking around 
corners. Seeing our surroundings and being able to move around them is 
important so we do not bump into things and get hurt. 
When you are participating in athletics, especially sports such as dancing, 
skateboarding, bowling, diving, and skiing, balance and spatial awareness 
are very important. Even jumping on a trampoline or riding a bicycle 
requires both!
MISSION QUESTION: How could you perform a physical activity that 
would improve balance and spatial awareness?
MISSION ASSIGNMENT:  Balance Training
Practice:
       Choose a smooth-surfaced solid wall, approved by an adult for use.
       Bounce a tennis ball off the wall and try to catch it while balancing on one foot. Raise your
       foot up behind you, level with your knee.
       Count how many seconds you can stand on one foot while throwing the tennis ball against
       the wall. Try not to let the ball or your foot touch the floor. Try to balance for at least 
       30 seconds without falling. 
       Continue to practice this activity over time until you can keep your balance for 60 seconds
       without having to start over.
Game:
Divide into groups, each forming a circle. Each circle should contain at least 6 players.
In your circle:
       Space a distance more than arms length apart.
       Try to balance on one foot while gently tossing a gym ball to a player across from you. 
       If a player loses balance and both feet touch the floor, he or she must hop on one foot,
       around the outside of the circle before rejoining the game.
Record observations before and after this physical experience in your Mission Journal.
Follow these instructions to train like an astronaut.
MISSION: CONTROL!
Spatial Awareness:
Knowing where you It’s a NASA Fact:
are in your space 
compared to your During the first few days of space flight and after returning to Earth, 
surroundings. astronauts experience a change in spatial awareness and may lose some 
sense of balance when they return to Earth. Research scientists from 
Agile: NASA’s Neurosciences Laboratory closely monitor the crew members, 
Being ready and able who often report difficulty walking around corners and feeling like they are 
to move quickly and “tumbling” when they move their heads from side-to-side. Their brain has 
easily. to relearn how to use information from their eyes, tiny balance organs in 
Coordination: their inner ear, and their muscles to help control body movement. These 
Using your muscles problems are usually corrected after several weeks have passed and 
together to move balance exercises are added to their fitness routine. Until then, they have 
your body the way to be extra careful; which means they may not be able to do some physical 
you want it to. activities like fly a plane or drive a car.
MISSION COMPLETE:  Test Yourself!
Complete the practice of throwing and catching the tennis ball for 60 seconds
without reaching your hand out to an object or touching your other foot down.
Look in a mirror, or have another student watch you to check for accuracy as
you practice this activity for improving balance and spatial awareness.
Complete the balance game without losing your balance.
    While exploring, astronauts must watch out  
    for rocks and craters in their paths to avoid tripping!
Improving your     The area under your feet should be clear of all obstacles.
balance and     Stay at least an arms distance from the wall and from others while    
    doing this activity.
spatial awareness 
    Do not throw the ball too hard, nor use a ball that is too heavy.
will make you 
    Remember that drinking plenty of water is important before, during, 
more coordinated     and after physical activities.
and agile. It will 
decrease the 
chances of being  Mission Explorations:
hurt, or hurting 
someone else, While standing still, stand on a soft surface and balance on one foot.
due to a fall. Examples: towel, pillow, or cushion.
Time yourself while trying to balance on two feet with your eyes closed.
Open your eyes if you start to lose your balance.
While practicing simple balance activities, you can also lift one foot
to increase the difficulty.
Status Check: Have you updated your Mission Journal?
www.nasa.gov
Think Safety!
