 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A   
 voiding slips and falls during  
 i cy and slippery conditions
 
It is important that everyone recognizes the hazards of icy/slippery walks and roadways and makes 
the appropriate adjustments. Several things can be done to reduce the risk of injury when slippery 
conditions exist... 
1. Wear boots or overshoes with gripping soles. Slick leather, plastic, or smooth surfaced soles 
on shoes will increase the risk of slipping.  
2. Do not walk with your hands in your pockets. This reduces the ability to use your arms for 
balance if you do slip.  
3. Take short deliberate shuffling steps in very icy areas.  
4. Do not carry or swing heavy loads, such as large boxes, cases or purses that may cause you 
to lose your balance while you are walking.  
5. Give yourself plenty of time. Take short steps with your feet pointed slightly outward. This will 
help keep your center of balance under you and provide a stable base for support. 
6. Don't step on uneven surfaces. Avoid curbs covered with ice. 
7. Try to walk on snow rather than icy areas. 
8. Place your full attention on walking. Distractions such as reading, digging in your pocketbook 
or backpack while walking on ice are dangerous. 
9. If you are the first one to arrive at your building, take the initiative to spread salt on the steps 
and building entrance ways.  Note: Do not attempt to carry the salt bucket if you believe it is 
too heavy.  Have someone else help you so that you don’t get injured in the process. 
10. Dress warmly. Being cold may cause you to hurry or tense your muscles -- both of which can 
affect your balance. 
11. Be extremely careful getting out of your vehicle. If possible, swing your legs around and place 
both feet on the pavement before you attempt to stand. Steady yourself on the doorframe until 
you have gained your balance. Avoid reaching beyond your center of balance to take hold of 
the door, because this may cause a fall. 
12. Don't take shortcuts. Always use sidewalks and the cleared paths in parking lots. Never walk 
between parked cars. Be especially careful when stepping to different levels -- down or up 
steps or from curbs (don't step on curbs); and remember, grassy slopes can be as dangerous 
as snowy steps. 
13. When walking after sunset or in shadowed areas, be alert for black ice – particularly in the 
days following a storm. Once parking lots, sidewalks and steps have been cleared, a thin layer 
of water remains and refreezes when the temperature drops. 
14. Use handrails for balance wherever available. 
 
 
 
 
 
Call Plant Engineering at extensions 3082 or 3 
 
 
 
 
 083 for snow and ice removal. 
For replacement of calcium ice melt buckets at the entrance ways to the building, call Plant 
Engineering at extension 3084. 
If after contacting any of the Plant Engineering numbers, the hazardous condition has not 
been resolved, report the condition to the Safety & Health Services Division at extension 
4207. 
revised 12/16/03
